Palestinians in Gaza suffer a
humanitarian catastrophe bombed and
besieged by Israel with nothing allowed
in and no way out the UN is blocked on
the ground and the Security Council is
polarized and Paralyzed by veto what
role can the UN play in Gaza this is
Inside
Story
hello again I'm James Baye human
suffering on an epic scale the view of
the UN Secretary General Antonio gues on
the plight of 2.3 million Palestinians
under Israeli bombardment in Gaza in
peace time cutting off supplies of food
water medicine electricity and fuel
would be a disaster in a time of War for
a besieged Enclave with thousands killed
and injured in Relentless attacks it's a
catastrophe ropy heroic efforts by
medical personnel rescue crews and
civilians continue while Israel blocks
desperately need humanitarian aid for
most Palestinians the UN is a Lifeline
the main source of supplies and the
international witness to their suffering
un staff have been killed in Israeli
attacks and un schools and Clinics have
been bombed but in New York the security
Council has failed to back motions that
could have facilitated humanitarian
relief so what can the UN do to help
Palestinians what es does the global
body face in this war we're discussing
all of this in a moment with our panel
of guests but first the pal Palestinian
journalist hanni Abu aseba tells us what
life is like in Gaza
today ongoing mass bombardment or better
known by experts as carpet bombing has
turned major parts of the Gaza Strip
into a pile of rebels in a statement
made by the Ministry of Health the air
strikes have almost declaimed the life
of 3,7
3,478 Palestinians lives 70% of those
who have been killed by the air strikes
are children and women there are also
12,000 Palestinians who have been
critically
injured with the number with number
trapping under the rubbles the expected
numbers of Palestinian victims is
expected to rise to 6,000 making it
closer to the victims of the serban
Massacre Complete Siege on the Gaza
Strip with serious shortage of of a fuel
and and and medical supplies has pushed
hospitals and medical centers on the
brink of collapse we have hospitals so
far that are running out of services
adding only pressures to other hospitals
who have who are already running beyond
their
[Music]
capacities so let's bring in our panel
of guests to discuss all of this in
Geneva Mukesh capila a professor at the
University of Manchester in the UK and a
former un humanitarian coordinator in
Alexandria in the US state of Virginia
is USF Muna the head of the Palestine
and Israel program at the Arab Center
Washington D.C and in London we have
Chris gunnis he's a former un relief and
works agency spokesperson but he doesn't
work for them anymore he's speaking to
us in an independent uh capacity let me
start with You Chris because we've
already had four Gaza was before and you
were there speaking on behalf of the UN
from Jerusalem about the situation in
Gaza when you see what has happened this
time the fact that death toll has far
exceeded the death toll in 2014 are you
surprised in any way how bad things
are I'm not surprised because the
blockade has continued I am surprised by
the sheer loss of life and the lack of
Hope um looking forward um what what I'm
hoping is that the UN will be allowed to
take trucks in unra before this conflict
was taking in 500 trucks a day so you
know that's the level we got got it up
to 1.1 million people in Gaza are
dependent on unra for food so apart from
getting in 500 trucks a day there's got
to be a ceasefire for that already 13
unre workers have been killed already 13
schools have been hit now we hear the
latest report from unra half a million
people in unra schools um health clinics
have been hit as well so we need a
proper ceasefire and we need to look at
the unra buildings unra has 11 food
distribution centers across the Gaza
Strip if they're going to get in huge
amounts of food obviously those
warehouses there may be structural
damage after this intense Israeli
bombardment and there's got to be a
ceasefire so that people can come and
collect the food so a massive logistical
and I dare say political um operation in
order to get this ceasefire going so so
a huge amount of work I believe that
unra 13,000 of my former colleagues are
there they' have stood by the people of
Gaza in their most desperate hour of
need in the last four Wars they will
continue to do that but make no mistake
unra is on its knees financially also
they've put out a flash appeal for a 100
million well that has got to be met
because we've got to get food we've got
to get water and by the way fuel
Israel's not yet said it will allow fuel
in well there's no point getting water I
mean it's got the pumping station the
desalination plant that's got to work so
we need security we need a huge amount
of trucks 500 today to go through Rafa
Rafa was bombed recently it's a very
small um one Road in One Direction one
Road in the other so there is a huge
amount of work Financial for unra
logistical to get the uh the Rafa
Crossing functional and also security
there's got to be a ceasefire so that
this massive humanitarian need can be
met mesh we we know that there's been
work going on trying to arrange some
sort of Aid going into Gaza for well
over a week now and finally President
Biden it seemed got some progress but as
Chris said you know hundreds of trucks
before the war used to go into Gaza and
initially the deal is just for 20 trucks
you were a former humanitarian
coordinator for the UN and Resident
coordinator in Sudan how on Earth if you
were in the job now in in Gaza how on
Earth would prioritize what to send if
you've only got 20
trucks well I think the 20 trucks I hope
I just symbolic to test the uh the the
the the route and uh to build confidence
and I hope from 20 it'll grow to 2,000
or even even more uh having said that uh
I think there has to be prioritization
obviously food and water and Health Care
dominates as elsewhere but at the same
time as I think just been said it is not
just to send in relief trucks there has
to be enough peace enough truth so that
people can get it and can actually
benefit from it and so the idea that you
can carry on fighting uh and then try to
mitigate some of the suffering by
sending in a few trucks here and there
and then hoping that people will somehow
get some relief is I think a very flaw
Prospect and in fact uh I can imagine
some serious security and logistic
issues happening ahead and even costing
lives if there isn't the dec conflicting
of of relief provision and relief uptake
and of course the ongoing bombing and
fighting ussef what we're hearing though
from the Israeli military is yes
Netanyahu is letting some Aid in but
there's no suggestion that they're
stopping their military um operation the
bombardment has been continuing
including around Rafa in in recent hours
and there's no suggestion that they're
not going to go to the next stage the
ground offensive that's unfortunately
absolutely correct um the level of uh
horrific violence that we are seeing
Unleashed now on Gaza everything that
we're hearing from folks on the ground
who by the way have lived through far
too many uh Wars uh are saying that this
is worse than anything that they've ever
experienced in terms of of the the the
sheer level of of Destruction and cost
um to human life uh of course
humanitarian Aid is important uh the aid
workers who are working on the ground
despite this uh are doing heroic things
but the reality is that humanitarian Aid
is not going to do a whole lot for
people who don't live to receive it uh
even the little that does trickle in uh
and so a um you know an urgent push
needs to be made in this moment to bring
a stop uh to the bombing for an
immediate ceasefire uh not just so that
the conditions can exist to allow
humanitarian Aid to come in but because
uh the most urgent concern now uh is
saving lives that do not need to be lost
um and we have seen far too many of them
lost already if I can come back to you
Chris what's just been said James yeah
if I may I mean Palestinians do not want
to be on Aid they want to live decent
independent life so building on what has
just been said of course all those
things must happen but we need to make
sure that ultimately the blockade is
lifted so that the constant conversation
is about what's being allowed into Gaza
bread right you know all these we need
to look at what's coming out of Gaza
Palestinians are entrepreneurial they're
educated they're motivated they're
brilliant people Gaza could be the
Singapore of the Middle East if it was
allowed to be so as well as a discussion
about
letting food and and other materials in
there has to be also at the same time
some kind of discussion about what is
allowed out Gaza is a hugely productive
Society there was agricultural produce
there was garment industry there's a
food industry drinks there's all sorts
of stuff and in order for G to be put
back on its feet there must be a proper
conversation about what is let out and
that's very important even at this stage
those conversations should start if I
can stay with you Chris for a moment if
you can help our viewers just a little
bit more detail on you know the
geography you know the logistics you
know the Rafa border crossing just tell
us a little bit more about the Rafa
border crossing and uh alar which is the
airport about 45 kilometers away where
apparently there's now they've got a
great deal of humanitarian assistance
that's been flown in I'm told an
estimated 3,000 tons is there um how
difficult will it be getting that in
through the choke point of Rafa and then
Distributing it
well I've been through the Rafa Crossing
with Desmond tuti as it happens on his
mission many years ago and it's a single
Lane Road in One Direction at least it
used to be coming out and a single Lane
going north going into Gaza and it was
bombed by the Israelis so it very very
rapidly has got to be repaired um allish
is nearby and you can get from allish to
to Rafa very very quickly but can I say
also James that when we had from the
Israelis many years ago this security
narrative that if we let stuff in or we
let stuff out there's going to be
weapons and bombs the European Union and
others built the Kum Shalom crossing
point it is a huge industrial scale
trans shipment point of a sort you get
in a point at a port with dozens of
lanes for trucks and container lorries
and that was built in a way which was
apparently seing to Israel's legitimate
security concerns now I don't know what
state it's in now but the very purpose
of Karam Shalom was precisely what we
are discussing now and that is to get in
industrial scale levels of products so
that 1.1 and more million people can
have the food and the water and the
medicine and the fuel and all the things
that a society needs so yes if Rafa is
the only game in town sure it has to be
used you've got Alish nearby things can
be brought in but ultimately the World
created this thing called the caram
Shalom crossing point and it should be
opened up immed immediately because only
k k Sham in its present form will
allowing in the vast levels of
assistance and other materials that are
needed Yousef when it comes to the
things that are needed the needs of the
of the people the desperate needs of the
people of Gaza um Chris just mentioned
fuel um tell us how important fuel is I
mean for for pumping water desalination
plants but probably most importantly for
the hospitals in
Gaza yeah it's hard for people to really
wrap their heads around what life uh in
Gaza is like the uh lack of electricity
has been um uh you know a constant
condition in the Gaza Strip now for
years uh it has uh increasingly gone
gotten worse over time uh at
particularly since the Israelis bomb
gaza's only Power Plant in 2006 it's
never really been able to recover uh and
um um uh the the presence of electricity
uh sometimes can be a few hours a day
sometimes can be um not at all and in
many places in the Gaza Strip that is
the case now of course so fuel has
become really uh a a backup option for
creating electricity through uh
generators uh which so many different um
uh homes uh institutions um and and um
you know and and plants require to be
able to function whether it comes to
water desalination or you know keeping
the lights and the machines uh on in
hospital wards that are trying to
desperately save the lives of people who
have been um who have been brutally
injured in uh in these attacks and I and
I do want to just add one thing here in
relation to the conversation about the
The Crossings and rafah and so on um you
know a a lot here depends on the United
States's ability to get the Israelis uh
to uh allow this to happen um and one
episode that I think was missed by a lot
of folks is the other day the United
States Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin uh was meeting with uh the
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu for eight hours during this
time the United States was telling its
citizens in the Gaza Strip to head to
the Rafa Crossing so that they could be
able to exit safely and it was during
this time time while the secretary of
state was meeting with the Israeli Prime
Minister and telling his citizens to go
to rafah because it was safe um that the
Israelis bombed the Rafa Crossing again
and so I think a a major issue here uh
is that the the only player that really
has uh leverage and the ability to
restrain the Israelis um is unable to
even do so for the protection of its own
citizens even when its secretary of
state is sitting next to the Israeli
prime minister and I think that should
send a great degree of concern to all of
us uh about uh how much leverage there
is uh over um Israel in this moment uh
as it is denying access uh to
humanitarian Aid to everybody there and
also of course riging bombs down on the
population Mukesh as a former senior
humanitarian official um even if you get
Aid in is it is it is it good enough if
if you don't have a Ceasar to deliver
that
Aid I think it's extremely difficult I
think that if you you know how the
humanitarian scene has changed the in
the old days when there were Wars you
agreed a pause in the war and then you
supplied Aid and then people went went
back to fighting now we're expecting
humanitarians to actually Supply Aid in
the middle of the fighting for hospitals
to function even as the bombs are
raining on you and I think this is not a
tenable situ in fact probably more
people are being placed at the risk not
just Aid workers who lose lose their
lives but also people who are coming to
that so I I and I'm really not sure
whether the focus on Aid getting in is
really that important compared to
actually what we need to be doing which
is to have a more sustained sensation of
hostilities even if we were to increase
the amount of Aid going in through the
through the Raa border with the road
repair and so on it is going to be
marginal to survival chances of the
people so either the people have to get
out or they have to come to a safe Zone
where AID can be supplied safely so I do
worry that quite a lot of discussion
about humanitarian Aid is almost to use
humanitarian Aid as an alibi for not
being able to do the other things and I
think that tension has to be on the
political side as much as on the age
side okay Mukesh let me pick up that
point about a possible Ceasar or
humanitarian Paws because it's something
that the UN Security Council had before
them two different resolutions a Russian
resolution that didn't pass the security
Council and then a Brazilian draft which
originally had called for an immediate
ceasefire and after lots of negotiations
including the US's allies the UK and
France watering it down became
humanitarian pauses and yet the US still
vetoed that resolution it would have
passed otherwise there were 12 other
countries uh in favor of the resolution
listen now to what the US ambassador
said to explain why she raised her hand
and vetoed a resolution calling for
humanitarian
pauses we are on the ground doing the
hard work of diplomacy and while we
recognize Brazil's desire to move this
text forward we believe we need to let
that diplomacy play out especially when
Secretary General gues President Biden
secretary blinkin and Regional actors
are engaged in intensive Dialogue on the
very issues we are deliberating on
today yes resolutions are important and
yes this Council must speak out but the
actions we take must be informed by the
facts on the ground and support direct
diplomacy efforts that can save lives
the council needs to get this right
Chris listen to that I think the excuse
was we cannot have a humanitarian pause
because it will get in the way of
diplomacy what's the point of
diplomacy more to the point it will get
into in the way of Israel's war aims
it's absolutely disgraceful it's
disgusting to hear that being said I've
lived through these wars and let me tell
you at the end of all of these Gaza
bombardments when they're going on
America always gives Israel I hate to
use this phrase a grace period a period
in which they say okay you go and
achieve your War aims you carry on
bombing you can carry on killing
civilians but you know don't embarrass
us too much let it be a couple of weeks
but after this you know egregious this
terrible violence on the 7th of October
I imagine that America is giving Israel
a much longer period a grace period it's
utter hypocrisy to hear an American
ambassador say these things about giving
diplomacy a chance we've live those of
us who've been there and seen these live
through these terrible bombardments we
all know that America says to Israel
there's going to be a grace period for
you take a while you know whatever try
and you know deal with International
humanitarian law I'm sorry to be cynical
but this is what has happened if America
wanted to put its hand up and vote with
that resolution yesterday they could
have done they could have sent a message
to the Israelis that enough is enough
you've destroyed more of Gaza than
you've ever done in a single War the
time has got to stop frankly as far as
I'm concerned that is the use of
international Aid as a political tool
it's condemnable mukes you had a
point I do have a point I I have many
points but the first one is I don't hear
Linda the American ambassador quite
saying that what I heard more is that
the American Administration wants uh to
get credit for their diplomacy so how
can you have a security Council
resolution that when the US president is
in the air coming to uh coming to to
Jerusalem so I think there's a bit of
national ego here involved more than
anything else else the Americans have
invested such a lot in that area and
they somehow want to get the credit for
whatever pauses or ceasefires or
humanitarian access that's one thing and
the second thing I want to say and this
is even more important is that I don't
think we should be too fixed up on this
there have been many many Security
Council resolutions in the past and on
other situations before the security
Council got paralyzed uh and it doesn't
make any difference
so I think we should be worried about
the situation on the ground and
practical diplomacy and practical action
not worrying of but symbolic words as
well as we shouldn't worry about small
changes in phraseology to please every
constituency on the security Council we
are distracted by this nothing is going
to be solved in the security Council or
in New York that's not the action is the
action is on the ground the action is
whether or not people live or die
according to what access they have and
what practical diplomats can do on the
ground in terms of affecting the the C
so people should not get up to head up
Security Council resolutions in my
opinion okay well I am I'm still going
to ask about it though and I'll ask youf
about this um I'm hearing from diplomats
that the US was signaling that it could
probably support this resolution in fact
the Chinese Ambassador said that in the
security Council he said the fact they
vetoed was nothing short of
unbelievable yeah it's absolutely
disgraceful and I think it's important
to keep in mind that there were previous
attempts at the security Council to put
forward uh a uh a resolution calling for
a ceasefire with different language that
was rejected not just by the United
States uh and of course there was a
number of modifications made to language
which uh was then uh agreeable enough to
everybody except the uh United States um
who of course vetoed it anyway I think
that the excuses given for uh The veto
uh are um also disgraceful but even if
we take them at face value what has
American diplomacy achieved in this
moment uh the president of the United
States was on his way to the region uh
and uh could not even meet uh with his
key allies outside of Israel uh to try
to get a hold on the situation because
the entire region uh is rejecting uh the
American position on this issue thus far
um every moment that goes by uh the
United States is continuing to lose
control over the ability uh to not just
control the situation on the ground in
Gaza but to control the situation
throughout an entire region which is on
the brink of regional War which might
bring the United States into direct
confrontation uh with with uh states in
the Middle East again um the United
Nations I I I would I would agree that
what is happening on the ground is of of
of the utmost importance but at the same
time the failure of the International
System uh to uphold um international law
uh and to demand accountability for it
is the reason why we are here at this
moment and the continued failure to do
that I think we should only expect will
bring us to more dangerous and horrific
moments um for which it will be much
much harder to to get out of um and so I
think there are tremendous consequences
to this American policy uh thus far on
this on this uh War has been to give
Israel the maximum amount of space and
time uh to exact what the Israeli Prime
Minister called Mighty Vengeance um in
the Gaza Strip uh this is unconscionable
on a moral level uh and it is incredibly
dangerous on a policy level uh in ways
that will impact everybody around the
world Chris the failure in the security
Council under new um um Arrangements
that came in last year means this
actually has to go to the UN General
Assembly they have to have a a meeting
um on this within 10 working days unless
there is an emergency special session
called and apparently Russia's going to
call one of those now when it comes to
the court of 193 countries uh they are
more favorable uh to the Palestinians uh
potentially than the security Council
where the where the US has um has a veto
do you think this could be in the long
run Dam damaging for the US with regard
to the global South might it harm them
for example in explain their case in
Ukraine well can I say that when this
does move out of the security Council I
sincerely hope that a bit of balance is
injected into this debate and into this
narrative because at the moment the
narrative is about terrorism and it's
about Israel's right to defend itself
which I think is partly why the
Americans veto this in fact the
Ambassador actually said we wanted
something in the resolution about
Israel's right to defend itself but make
no mistake that when you you talk to
Palestinians and other Arab countries
about this there are three causes
underlying causes of the conflict which
must be addressed first of all the
blockade of Gaza which has seen 2.3
million people subjected to utter
indignities and that has to end it's an
invisible thing it's not a new story you
can point a camera at but it from a
Palestinian perspective is the first
cause of the conflict that must be
addressed secondly the occupation that's
gone on since 1967 and what we've seen
with the last Administration that the
rightwing the far right settler
Administration is we've seen increased
settlement expansion Jewish settlers and
with that has come the most appalling
settler violence protected by the
Israeli Army the BL the the the
occupation is the second cause
underlying cause the conflict the
Palestinians would like to see address
it and very lastly the dispossession of
the Palestinians in 1948 their entire
communities their societies were
dismantled and and that has never been
properly addressed so unless and until
we see those three underlying causes of
the conflict addressed in a wider debate
perhaps in the general assembly I think
that Israelis are destined to live in a
state of nervousness anxiety insecurity
and the people of Gaza the Palestinians
are likely to have further causes of
resentment brutalization and
radicalization so I hope that when this
debate moves away from the security
Council some balance can be rejected and
the underlying causes of the conflict
can be addressed as we move away from
this Narrative of terrorism and Israel's
rights defend itself of course Israel
has the right to defend itself but we
need to stand back and look at the
underlying causes of this conflict thank
you Chris thank you to all our guests
I'm afraid we have to leave it there
Chris gunnis Yousef Muna and Mukesh
capila you'll find this program and all
our previous programs if you want to
watch them again on our website ala.com
if you have views on our discussion
today to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory and you can
also find us on the social media site
formerly known as Twitter on xway at AJ
inside story I'll be back in this chair
in 24 hours time until then from the
team here in Doha stay safe bye for
now